---
layout: post
title: "Book Reviews: Martin, Malcolm, and America, and Freedom's Daughters"
date: 2016-12-22
categories: bookreview
---

Note: This post contains historical information related to racism and sexism
that may be upsetting to the reader.

# **Context and Motivation**

There are many reasons why it is important for people in general, and for me in
particular, to learn more about the civil rights movement in America. Two major
ones are as follows: First, the events that happened in recent history, whether
we like it or not, shape the present and the future. In order to combat these
negative influences, we should understand where they came from. Second, from a
practical perspective, any current problems that we want to address now can
benefit from an understanding of what worked and didn't work for social
movements in the past. Indeed, I have been seeking practical knowledge about
what does and doesn't work in building a movement. Other books that I have read
on racism have been useful, but often take an academic appoach that lacks
practical advice on how to make change.

After researching a few books, I fell upon *Martin and Malcolm
and America* by James H. Cone. While this book is great, it focuses on two
individuals whereas a movement is generated by a collection of people, not just
leaders.  Likewise, it puts a strong emphasis on male leadership. This is why I
read the second book, *Freedom's Daughters* Lynne Olson, which is about the
contributions of women to black liberation. Below, I discuss my main takeaways
from these books. I highly recommend reading both of these books.


# Martin, Malcolm, and America Key Points:

- Martin Luther King Jr. and Malcolm X grew up in very different circumstances,
  which substantially impacted their values. James Cone does an expert job of
  looking into their history and writings in order to capture how their
  upbringings influenced their views. Likewise, it is important for us as
  individuals to be comfortable with and humble by the knowledge that many of
  our values are somewhat arbitrary results of our circumstances and
  experiences. Going into a bit more detail, Martin grew up mostly shielded
  from racism, whereas Malcolm had to flee his home as a child due to violence
  from white supremacists. These experiences shaped what types of activism that
  they chose to engage in. Relatedly, a key point is that you can only
  understand the choices that each of them made by understanding the
  experiences and choices that the other made.

- Religion played an essential role in both of their lives, motivating them to
  address challenges that seemed unsurmountable. For Martin, his desire to
  change and love those who were violent towards African American people was
  deeply rooted in his Baptist faith. For Malcolm, he found strength in the
  Black nationalism of Elijah Muhammad that let him believe that he was worthy
  of respect where all other societal influences demeaned him. Even though I am
  not religious, I have always respected the community that religion creates
  for people. Reading this book has deepened my respect for religion as a
  source of strength. While most of my personal investigation into religion has
  focused on the veracity of religion, this book exposed me to a new type of
  analysis that is concerned with how religion impacted people's lives
  regardless of the truth of their beliefs.

- What should White people do about racism? Martin and Malcolm had different
  answers that worked to different extents. While Martin sought to bring white
  and black people together, Malcolm saw white people as inherently evil for much of
  his life and preferred activist white people to work within their own
  communities.  This is important to think about in the context of current work
  that I may engage in (e.g. being supportive in science, or other issues that
  I could get involved in). The main takeaway is that activists are going to
  have sharply varying opinions on the role of white people in the fight
  against racism (as do women on the role of men in feminism).

- There is a great amount of value in leaders who are dedicated to learning
  about and creating change. While they found truth along different paths, both
  Martin and Malcolm were voracious in their pursuit of understanding why
  society was the way it was. In addition to studying, both were passionate in
  their desire for debate as they found it to be the best way to determine what
  was right and what was wrong.  Furthermore, they were sincere in their desire
  for debate as both men were willing to change their views when they
  encountered new evidence.  I think that this is interesting in the context of
  current liberal movements because, whether or not they like it, many liberal
  movements create a culture of fear where people with opposing view points
  don't feel like they can safely express their views. (Some articles have been
  coming out on this topic lately, and I'd be happy to discuss this point if
  you wish.)

- Civil rights issues are complex and benefit from multiple approaches and
  solutions. One thing that I have found is that many people in activism seem
  to feel that there is one right way to do things. Based on the history in
  this book, I'd like to suggest that it is important to note that the greatest
  progress is going to be made by pursing a variety strategies. For example,
  Martin sought to appeal to white people's positive side, whereas Malcolm
  sought to build power among Black people. While they spent much time arguing
  about the corrent approach to black liberation, the movement benefited from
  both of their approaches. Likewise, I think that it is important for modern
  activists who often focus on ideological purity to be more open meeting
  people where they are at instead of shaming them. Interestingly, while Martin
  was initially perceived as an extremist by white people, once those people
  learned about Malcolm's black nationalism, they were more open to listening
  to Martin.

- While it is hard to summarize here, there is much benefit to be gained from
  learning about the details of the ideologies of Martin and Malcolm. For
  instance, what did they see as the core problems facing black people and what
  were the appropriate solutions? Likewise, there is a lot of misinformation
  about both of these people and a careful study of what they actually said can
  dispel many of those myths. For instance, many people incorrectly cite Martin
  as unconditionally denouncing violent protests, whereas it is more accurate
  to say that he would denounce those who took no action in the presence of
  oppression. Alternately, the media at the time sought to label Malcolm as an
  extremist due to his black nationalist views instead of critically reflecting
  on the truth of the mistreatment of black America that he spoke so
  passionately about.

# Freedom's Daughter's Key Points:

- One of the main points of this book is that women in the civil rights
  movement were essential to the movement (for instance, in their organizing
  duties, community building, putting themselves in danger). Furthermore, they
  were often pushed out of leadership positions because they were women. The
  rest of the book discussed different ways in which this manifest itself.
  Certainly, this is a continuing theme in social justice-focued communities.
  One interesting historical note is that since men were so violently
  emasculated during slavery, many women in the movement were happy to let men
  assert their masculinity by asserting leadership roles. Other women were
  negative about the treatment of women, but put up with it as they saw racism
  as a primary issue where solidarity was essential. This historical context is
  sometimes lost in discussion of this history in feminist works.

- The book talks a lot about the SNCC, or the student nonviolent coordinating
  committee, which sought to have whites and blacks work together as one. One
  of the most interesting points for me is that while people in this group had
  a strong sense of community, the pressures from overall society took their
  toll on its members. For instance, while white women and black men weren't
  allowed to be lovers in the country at large (and such a relationship could
  get a black man killed in the South), this group created an environment that
  allowed interracial relationships. But it then happened that many of the
  black women were jealous of the white women for sleeping with black men
  (perhaps rightfully so, as the purity of white women was the main ideological
  tool used in the South to justify the lynching of black men). The individuals
  in the group couldn't separate themselves from years of divisive ideology
  that was commonplace in America at the time. So even though the group sought
  to insulate itself from society at large, the individuals in the group could
  only do so much to fend off these pressures. This is interesting to consider
  for current movements with a diverse membership that tensions are going to be
  unavoidable because we can only do so much to fight off societal pressure.

- The civil rights movement as led by the church (including Martin Luther King)
  did not value the contributions of women and rarely allowed women to take on
  leadership positions. While these instances of sexism were mentioned in the
  previous book, this book made a much larger effort to emphasize the
  weaknesses of the civil rights movement estabilishment with regards to the
  treatment of women. There were many hard-working and capable women who did
  not get recognition for the work that they did.

- There is a lot to be learned about the leadership style of Ella Baker.  She
  was an activist who sought to empower other black people to fight for their
  rights. While many leaders in the SLCC were focused more on building their
  organization, she was focused on giving other people the tools to take on
  direct action. She took on many activist roles, including training the next
  generation of activists. There is a lot to be learned from the ambitious
  goals that she set and how she sought to empower average people.

- Beyond these general points, there are many individual women who deserve a
  lot of recognition and credit. I will admit that compared to the previous
  book, it was hard to keep track of these names because there were so many
  women who contributed so much.  I highly recommend reading the book so that
  you can learn more detail about the contributions and ideology of these female
  activists.

- One of the most widely noted events in the civil rights movement was the
  Montgomery Bus Boycotts. The essential situation is that while blacks were
  allowed to use the busses in Montgomery, they were demeaned when they tried
  to use them (e.g. had to sit in the back, couldn't use seats reserved for
  whites, insulted by the bus drivers). Many people were unhappy but didn't
  know what to do. Prior to Rosa Parks, there were actually a number of women
  who also defied the bus rules. However, when female activists wanted to start
  a protest, the leadership of the black churches refused because the
  individuals in question weren't respectable enough to be the poster child of
  the movement. Even when Rosa Parks did get arrested (and she was deemed to be
  of good moral character), there was still resistance to starting a protest.
  Women took charge in convincing male religious leaders to support the
  boycott.

- Another very important story to consider is that of the Freedom Rides.  In
  the 1960s, while segregation on the interstate bus system recently became
  illegal, it was dangerous for black people to actually use these buses in the
  South.  Furthermore, each station had areas reserved for whites only that
  were technically illegal but still enforced by locals. The freedom riders
  sought to bring these inequities to light. The fear and intimidation used by
  southern whites was intense. Essentially what would happen is that once news
  of the the Freedom riders arrived in the south, a mob would form and
  violently beat the people who dared challenge the status quo.

- While I am not an expert of this history, I couldn't help but feel that the
  author excessively idolized the people that took the most risks for attaining
  change compared to the religious leaders who served as the cornerstones of
  their communities that were reluctant to join protests. Religious leaders had
  real reason to fear that their communities would be destroyed by challenging
  the status quo - black people at the time were essentially at war (e.g.
  getting beaten or killed when they spoke out). These church leaders played an
  essential role in providing a foundation for their communities and their
  reluctance to shake things up was justified. I feel that while it is easy to
  say in retrospect that certain protests worked out in the end, there were
  many instances of resistance that didn't work out as well as those
  memorialized in history books.


# Conclusions:

While I have hit some of the major points that stuck out to me, I highly
recommend reading these books as they give a balanced and practical perspective
on the history of the civil rights movement that is relevant today. There are
so many important stories and pieces of context that I have not covered in this
post. Many current organizers can learn a lot from studying what worked well
and what didn't in past organizations. And finally, as usual, I may be wrong in
my analysis or summaries, so feel free to bring your thoughts to my attention
so that we may discuss them.



