---
layout: post
title: "How to Dramatically Improve your Life in 300 Days"
date: 2016-10-06
categories: life
---

300 is 10 times 30 - 10 habits, 30 days per habit. For the first 30 days, you
will focus on building on a habit that improves your life. You will think about
this habit every day for all 30 days. You will do this for a total of 10
different habits. Afterwards, you will have dramatically improved your life.
Either you will commit to improving your life starting today, of you won't do
it all - it is up to you!

# Foundations:
Here, I discuss the foundational ideas that will guide your self improvement.

- *Willpower is finite*: For the longest time, I thought that I had infinite willpower.
  Unfortunately, this is not the case. Whenever you make a decision, it uses up
  a finite reserve of willpower that you have that is replenished every
  morning. With this new insight, the key to improving your life is to design
  your environment so that you expend as little willpower as possible. Have
  trouble eating too much junk food? Stop buying it. Have trouble staying up
  late on the internet? Never bring your laptop / cell phone into your bedroom.
  This will serve as a guiding principle about how you will change your life to
  make new habits.  The key to improving your life is to recognizing the
  situations that trigger your habits, removing them, and replacing them with
  new situations and habits. Warning: this is extremely difficult. Most of the
  time when we do things, we aren't aware of why. The majority of your work
  will be identifying what exactly triggers the negative habit that you want to
  replace.

- *What is a habit?* A habit is something that you do automatically without
  even thinking about it. According to Aristotle, 95 percent of what we do is
  based on habits. They are so automatic that you are unlikely to even know why
  you do most of what you do! You will master a behavior in your life when you
  automatically do something positive without even thinking about it. For
  instance, suppose that you agree that it is beneficial to make every
  situation a win-win situation.  While cognitively this is obviously a good
  idea, you only have mastered this concept when you do it every time you are
  about it. Below, I'll describe a methodology for creating these habits. The
  goal of creating habits / systems is that it reduces the cognitive load of
  the things that you regularly do so that you can focus on new things.

- *Sometime isn't a time, now is a time*. If you are serious about improving your
  life, you will attempt to make changes in your life now. People who say they
  will make changes eventually are selling themselves short.

- *Habit cards and public commitment*: if you are serious about forming a new
  habit, write it down on a note card. On the back of the card, create a grid
  with 30 boxes. Everyday, you will write the date when you accomplish that
  habit. If you fail to do the habit that day, rip the card in half and start
  over. It is essential that you do these things every single day. Likewise,
  tell as many people as possible about what you are doing. If you are feeling
  reluctant about publically sharing your commitment, then you need to be
  honest with yourself that you aren't serious about making this happen.

- *Humility*: It is essential to be comfortable with the fact that you have
  internalized many things about the world that are incorrect or maladaptive
  and that you are unaware of. By being open to your weakness, you are best
  able to improve.


In summary, you will be able to dramatically improve your life *right now* by
creating positive habits (and eliminating negative ones) that allow you to make
most effective use of your limited willpower.


# The Habits

- *Get off the internet/tv in the evenings / no screens in the bedroom*: By
  getting off the internet, you will allow yourself to reflect upon your day
  and naturally fall asleep.  A relaxing and reflective time before bed is a
  foundational habit that will be essential in the development of all other
  habits.  Pick a time in the evening (eg. 10 pm).  After this time, do not go
  on any non-work related websites (eg. Facebook, youtube, news sites).
  Furthermore, don't go on your phone, watch TV, go on the computer, etc. For
  more information, I suggest researching evening routines and sleep hygiene.
  In the evening, in addition to reflecting about my day, I pack things for the
  next morning and reflect on the positive things in my life. I highly
  recommend not reading upsetting and negative news as this clouds your mind
  before you go to sleep.

- *Identify your top two priorities for the next day each evening*: By
  identifying your top priorities, you will be able to get more of what you
  want done when you want it done. In order to hit the ground running when your
  willpower is the highest, spend 10-15 mins each evening thinking about the
  most important one or two things that you will do tomorrow during your
  unstructured time. This will help you focus on getting things done rather
  than thinking about what you need to be doing.


- *Make every situation into a win-win situation*: A win-win situation is a
  situation where both parties benefit. The more that you can create win-win
  situations in your life, the more that others will love to interact with you
  and the more you will feel fulfillment from making positive change in your
  world. Every night, spend 10-15 minutes thinking about the interactions that
  you had that day. For every interaction, think about how that could be made
  into a win for both you and the other party involved. Likewise, think about
  how when you enter these interactions, you focus on explaining to the other
  person why it benefits them instead of explaining why it benefits you.
  Likewise, if you find yourself frequently entering interactions where the
  other person loses, you should re-evaluate how you treat others. For more
  information, I recommend reading How to Win Friends and Influence People by
  Dale Carnegie.

- *Become more in tune with your emotional states and communicate them*: Every
  evening, think about your emotional states and how they impacted your
  interactions with others. If there was a situation where you were upset, and
  short-tempered, did you warn the other person that you were feeling off? This
  type of emotional awareness is essential for dealing with others and
  mitigating conflicts. Depending on your situation, it may be good to meet
  with a counselor/therapist to proactively improve your mental health.

- *Plan Regular Exercise*: Regular exercise has many benefits. You will improve
  your mood, boost your energy, be fun, get better sleep, and improve your long
  term health.  Every night before you go to bed, think about the past 7 days
  and the next 7 days. Have you exercised at least 3 days in the past 7 days,
  and do you have plans to exercise at least 3 days in the next 7 days?  If you
  didn't exercise, what got in the way? If it was your mental state (eg.  being
  tired), what decisions led to that mental state and how can you fix them next
  time? It can also be fun to do a social exercise like playing a sport or
  going to the gym with a friend.

- *Start your day off right with a great morning routine*: Your morning routine
  sets the tone for the rest of the day. With a solid morning routine, you'll
  be able to hit the ground running and hit your most important tasks at the
  start of the day. In order to improve your morning routine, you have to plan
  it! The first stage is to do your research on what different people do in
  their mornings. I recommend some collection of the following:
  - Don't snooze your alarm
  - Drink a big glass of water
  - Make your bed
  - Make a healthy breakfast (research this and experiment!)
  - Do some spiritual activity (eg. meditation, positive visualization, read an
    affirmational text or blog)
  - Read the news, blogs or part of a book to inspire new ideas
  - Shower, brush, wash face, etc
  - Pack your bags
  - Leave for work

  Next, create a list of things that you will do every morning. Your habit card
  will say that you will do everything on your morning routine list. Of course,
  keep it flexible and allow yourself to change your morning routine the night
  before.

- *Create your own habits*: While I have listed a number of habits that I
  believe to be essential for a healthy life for myself, your life is going to
  be different than mine. Now is you chance to evaluate your life and find
  things to improve. One of the major pitfalls is that people identify a need
  (eg.  eat healthier), but they don't adequately flush out the idea into
  concrete actions. Every successfully executed goal is the result of taking a
  series of concrete actions. If you don't plan these actions, you are leaving
  your success up to your habits. Since this is an area where your habits
  aren't serving you well, you are going to continue the maladaptive behaviors
  if you don't plan as explicitly as possible. This is hard work. I recommend
  sitting down with a pen and paper for an hour (at minimum) to flesh out your
  plan. In the case of habits, make sure that you translate your broad goal
  into a concrete action that you will commit to doing every single day for 30
  days.  The end goal is that you will
  start doing this thing automatically afterwards. Some suggestions for other
  habits:

    - Say something nice to a person you love every day
    - Volunteer for a cause that is important to you
    - Read books that grow your mind
    - Cultivate friendships and surround yourself with people that improve your life
    - Create a system of saving and executing your todo list
    - Approach every situation with an attitude of mindfulness (see things as
      they are, don't add or subtract anything)

  If you are looking for more ideas for ways to improve your life, I highly
  recommend reading a variety of books. If you are looking for recommendations,
  just check out the books that I have reviewed in this blog. Indeed, the
  creation of the method behind this blog post was the natural evolution of me
  reading these books six months ago and then applying the principles in these
  books to my life.


# Conclusions:
Either you are going to make habit cards right now to improve your life or you
won't do it. There is no time like now.  For some of these habits, I invested
an hour to create the habit, but I immediately saw the benefit the next day
(eg. not going on the internet) and made back that time. While it takes real
mental effort to clearly articulate a concrete habit that you are willing to
commit to publically, your habits will have immediate impacts on improving your
life so much so that the time will be well worth it.

P.S. If this post you substantially, I'd love to hear from you
(through email, or otherwise)! I may offer one-on-one coaching in the future
for those of you who want to super-charge your self-improvement.


